None of us like being told lies,
but we are constantly bombarded
with false stories.
If we are not careful, they could harm us.
Today, we are going, therefore,
to develop the theme
“Protect Yourself From Lies.”
We will answer three questions:
What lies must we protect ourselves from?
Why are those lies dangerous?
And how can we protect ourselves from lies?
Let us start with the first question:
What lies must we protect ourselves from?
The lies we want to talk about today
are often called false news, fake news,
misinformation, or false information.
Today, we are experiencing
an avalanche of misinformation.
For example, there is
so much misinformation out there
about the COVID-19 pandemic.
These lies deal with the origin of the virus,
unproven prevention, and cures.
They include responses by governments,
companies, celebrities, and others.
Now, common to misinformation
is their sensational nature.
They are created to be widely shared
in order to generate revenue.
Or they are promoting or discrediting
a public figure,
a political movement, a company, etcetera.
Now, we often find false,
or fake, news in social media,
but we also find it
in the established news media.
In many countries, people know exactly
what newspaper or TV station
distorts the truth
in one or the other direction.
And yet, misinformation of this kind
has been in existence throughout history.
Let’s look at one example
that we find in 2 Kings chapter 18.
At one point, King Hezekiah
was confronted with propaganda
by Assyrian messengers.
What were the elements
of their misinformation?
Let’s look at the first element
that we find at 2 Kings 18:21.
Here we find an outright lie.
We read: “Look!
“You trust in the support
of this crushed reed, Egypt,
which if a man should lean on it
would enter into his palm and pierce it.”
This was a lie, for Hezekiah
had not made an alliance with Egypt.
Now let’s look at element number two.
We find it in verses 22 and 25.
After stating that Hezekiah had removed
Jehovah’s high places and altars in verse 22,
this is what we read in verse 25:
“Now is it without authorization from Jehovah
“that I have come up against this place
to destroy it?
“Jehovah himself said to me,
‘Go up against this land and destroy it.’”
So element number two is cunning reasoning.
We find bits of truthful information
that were suddenly diffused with lies.
The message was that Jehovah
would not act in behalf of his people
because he was displeased with them.
Yet, the opposite was true.
Jehovah was very happy with his people
because they had returned to true worship.
Now, what is element number three?
We find it in verse 31.
Here we see lies that are presented
in a way of an easy solution,
with tempting rewards.
We read in verse 31
(in the middle, starting there):
“Make peace with me and surrender,
“and each [one] of you
will eat from his own vine
“and from his own fig tree
and will drink the water of his own cistern.”
“Surrender” was presented as an easy solution
in connection with empty rewards.
The prospect of eating fresh bread
and drinking new wine
must have been tempting to those in lockdown.
However, did the Assyrians ever
treat their enemies kindly?
No, never.
That brings us to our second question:
Why are those lies dangerous?
Now, in Hezekiah’s day, the propaganda
was supposed to lead the Jews
in making a bad decision
—a decision that could have cost their lives.
Today, too, making a bad decision
would be the result
of trusting in false, or fake, news.
This is dangerous.
In this time of the pandemic,
this can have an effect
on our health and our life.
Reacting to other propaganda
can create financial losses
or can result in other negative consequences.
But there is even more at stake.
Lies destroy trust.
They create doubts, and they can undermine
our lifesaving determination
to follow Jehovah’s direction.
For example, we are determined to respect
governments and their laws
in harmony with Romans chapter 13.
Now, the news often presents politics,
politicians, state institutions
in a bad light.
Sometimes, we are confronted
with outright lies,
with cunning reasoning,
or with easy solutions with empty promises.
Please let’s be on the watch.
This can weaken our determination
to be faithful to Jehovah
by obeying the superior authorities
and displaying Christian neutrality.
Another example is
misinformation about Jehovah’s organization
and the Governing Body.
Jehovah’s Witnesses have been accused
of promoting Communism,
while others claim that we promote
the ideals and interests
of American imperialism.
Our brothers and sisters
have been called anarchists.
And nowadays, we are being called extremists,
and the list can go on.
What will be the next lie?
Remember, lies create doubts
and destroy trust.
Some of what we hear and read
is based on misinformation campaigns
of apostates.
It may sound convincing, even to us,
even if we now say:
“I will not believe it anyway.
I’m just curious to know what it is.”
Exposing ourselves
to this kind of misinformation
can create doubts
and undermine our complete trust
in the Governing Body.
This makes us vulnerable.
Jehovah will use his organization
to lead us through the great tribulation.
There is just no other way to succeed.
That brings us to our third question:
How can we protect ourselves
from those lies?
Now, we can protect ourselves from those lies
by limiting our exposure to misinformation.
Therefore, we need to look at the quality
and the quantity
of the information we take in.
The quality
—we want to pick
the most reliable source of information.
Quantity
—to stay up to date with world events,
we do not need to update ourselves
every hour.
Therefore, let us set a personal time limit
and then stick to it.
What else can we do?
Proverbs 14:15 says:
“The naive person believes every word,
but the shrewd one ponders each step.”
So the key is to have a healthy skepticism
while keeping an open mind.
Or we read at Job 12:11:
“Does not the ear test out words
as the tongue tastes food?”
So before reacting quickly
on something we hear or read,
we want to “test out words.”
Let us look for solid confirmation.
We want to compare
what we’ve read in the Bible
and what we’ve learned from the Bible
and what Bible principles apply.
Is there any guidance from the organization?
And when it comes to news
about Jehovah’s organization,
we can expect more lies to be spread
as we get closer to Jehovah’s day.
Let us, therefore,
strengthen our trust today.
The good guidance from Jehovah’s organization
during this pandemic
is just another proof
that Jehovah is with the Governing Body.
So our theme was
“Protect Yourself From Lies.”
We discussed the danger of misinformation
in its different forms:
outright lies, cunning reasoning,
and empty promises.
Lies destroy trust.
Therefore, let us limit
our exposure to these lies
and strengthen our trust in Jehovah
and his organization today.
This will prepare us
for one of the greatest lies
in the very near future:
“Peace and security!”
And remember, this will be fake news
and many (most people) will believe in it.